---
title: "Overcoming judgement"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Life
---
Everything has some nuances in it, doesn't it? There are always two sides to a coin. Our brain can't grasp that. How are you going to survive in a world where there are no labels?

Let's imagine a caveman confronting a lion. If he views the event with some nuances, thinking that there is a chance the lion wants to be his friend, then humans would not exist today! The man should run as fast as he can. There is a possibility that the lion doesn't want to eat him, but that possibility is so small. So the brain has to label the event as "bad" immediately for survival instinct. The brain makes shortcuts; it's easy, energy-saving, and effective.

That's the habit of the brain, isn't it? To save energy by creating shortcuts, labeling everything. It may work in the cave era. But we now live in a much more complicated society. If we continue to label everything, it'll cause some relationship loss and lots of other losses in our lifetime. So how can we modify this behavior? How can we take a step back and view life with more nuances?

When you encounter an event, in the best scenario, instead of judging it as good or bad immediately, you take a step back and view the event with some nuances.

What's an ideal and imaginary scenario?

You know for sure that your brain doesn't work that way; it jumps right into the conclusion without letting you have a chance to interfere with the labeling process. So how do you slowly take control? 

The solution: Be curious

Start by taking notice of everything around you, having curiosity to look around. Have you ever seen the other side of an event and then realized things actually have two sides? Let's say you have a teammate who disappears every single time and contributes little to the group work. You immediately label him as a "bad" and "irresponsible" person. But when you discover that he just went through depression, you'll be like, "Ahh, that's why he disappears; now I understand."

I'm not saying that you have to give that guy a full mark in peer review just because he went through depression; that's not the excuse. But at least you understand the other side of the coin. What happens after multiple experiences like this, you naturally start to step back and view the other side of the event. You naturally think about the other possibilities instead of labeling.

It becomes a habit, not effort. Effort is hard, but doing something based on habit is easy. It's as smooth as butter.
